Sir Pelham Grenville Wodehouse, (; 1881–1975) was a prolific English author, humorist and scriptwriter. After being educated at Dulwich College, to which he remained devoted all his life, he was employed by a bank, but disliked the work and wrote magazine pieces in his spare time. In 1902 he published his first novel, The Pothunters, set at the fictional public school of St. Austin's; his early stories continued the school theme. He also used the school setting in his short story collections, which started in 1903 with the publication of Tales of St. Austin's. Throughout his novel- and story-writing career Wodehouse created several renowned regular comic characters with whom the public became familiar. These include Bertie Wooster and his valet Jeeves; the immaculate and loquacious Psmith; Lord Emsworth and the Blandings Castle set; the disaster-prone opportunist Ukridge; the Oldest Member, with stories about golf; and Mr Mulliner, with tales on numerous subjects from film studios to the Church of England. Wodehouse also wrote scripts and screenplays and, in August 1911, his script A Gentleman of Leisure was produced on the Broadway stage. In the 1920s and 1930s he collaborated with Jerome Kern and Guy Bolton in an arrangement that "helped transform the American musical" of the time; in the Grove Dictionary of American Music Larry Stempel writes, "By presenting naturalistic stories and characters and attempting to integrate the songs and lyrics into the action of the libretto, these works brought a new level of intimacy, cohesion, and sophistication to American musical comedy." His writing for plays also turned into scriptwriting, starting with the 1915 film A Gentleman of Leisure. He joined Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM) in 1930 for a year, and then worked for RKO Pictures in 1937. At the outbreak of the Second World War, and while living in northern France, Wodehouse was captured by the Germans and was interned for over a year. After his release he was tricked into making five comic and apolitical broadcasts on German radio to the still neutral US. After vehement protests in Britain, Wodehouse never returned to his home country, despite being cleared by an MI5 investigation. He moved to the US permanently in 1947 and took American citizenship in 1955, retaining his British nationality. He continued writing until his death in 1975. ==Novels== thumb|upright|Wodehouse in 1930, aged 48 thumb|upright|Cover of Wodehouse's first published novel, 1902 Initially in chronological order by UK publication date, even when the book was published first in the US or serialised in a magazine in advance of publication in book form. Wodehouse's novels UK title Year of UK publication UK publisher (All publishers based in London) US title Year of US publication US publisher (New York, unless otherwise stated) Series Notes A & C Black Macmillan Publishers School – A & C Black Macmillan Publishers School – A & C Black Macmillan Publishers School – William Tell Told Again A & C Black William Tell Told Again Macmillan Publishers – – A & C Black Macmillan Publishers School – Love Among the Chickens Newnes Love Among the Chickens Circle Ukridge A rewritten version was published in 1921 A & C Black Macmillan Publishers School – Not George Washington Cassell and Co. Not George Washington Cassell and Co. – Co-authored with Herbert Westbrook; a semi- autobiographical novel Alston Rivers Seabury Press – – Mike A & C Black (See note) – – Psmith and School Second half published as Enter Psmith in 1935; both parts released in 1953, the first half as Mike at Wrykyn and the second as Mike and Psmith Alston Rivers Watt – An earlier version, The Gem Collector, was published in Ainslee's Magazine in December 1909 Psmith in the City A & C Black Psmith in the City Macmillan Publishers Psmith – Mills & Boon Watt – The US edition combines the plot of the UK publication with that of Psmith, Journalist Methuen Publishing Watt School – Psmith, Journalist A & C Black Psmith, Journalist Macmillan Publishers Psmith and Kid Brady – Something Fresh Methuen Publishing Something New D. Appleton & Company Blandings Castle – Uneasy Money Methuen Publishing Uneasy Money D. Appleton & Company – – Piccadilly Jim Jenkins Piccadilly Jim Dodd, Mead and Company – – Jenkins Doran – – Jenkins Their Mutual Child Boni & Liveright – – Jill the Reckless Jenkins Doran – – Jenkins Three Men and a Maid Doran – – Jenkins Mostly Sally Doran – – Leave It to Psmith Jenkins Leave It to Psmith Doran Psmith and Blandings Castle – Bill the Conqueror Methuen Publishing Bill the Conqueror Doran – – Sam the Sudden Methuen Publishing Sam in the Suburbs Doran – – Methuen Publishing Doran – – Money for Nothing Jenkins Money for Nothing Doubleday, Doran – – Summer Lightning Jenkins Fish Preferred Doubleday, Doran Blandings Castle – Big Money Jenkins Big Money Doubleday, Doran – – If I Were You Jenkins If I Were You Doubleday, Doran – – Doctor Sally Methuen Publishing – – – – – Hot Water Jenkins Hot Water Doubleday, Doran – – Heavy Weather Jenkins Heavy Weather Little, Brown and Company Blandings Castle – Thank You, Jeeves Jenkins Thank You, Jeeves Little, Brown and Company Jeeves – Right Ho, Jeeves Jenkins Brinkley Manor Little, Brown and Company Jeeves – Jenkins Little, Brown and Company – – Laughing Gas Jenkins Laughing Gas Doubleday, Doran – – Summer Moonshine Jenkins Summer Moonshine Doubleday, Doran – – Jenkins Doubleday, Doran Jeeves – Uncle Fred in the Springtime Jenkins Uncle Fred in the Springtime Doubleday, Doran Blandings Castle and Uncle Fred – Quick Service Jenkins Quick Service Doubleday, Doran – – Money in the Bank Jenkins Money in the Bank Doubleday, Doran – – Joy in the Morning Jenkins Joy in the Morning Doubleday Jeeves This has also been published as Jeeves in the Morning in the US Full Moon Jenkins Full Moon Doubleday Blandings Castle – Spring Fever Jenkins Spring Fever Doubleday – – Uncle Dynamite Jenkins Uncle Dynamite Didier & Co. Uncle Fred – Jenkins Didier & Co. Jeeves – Jenkins Doubleday – – Barmy in Wonderland Jenkins Angel Cake Doubleday – – Pigs Have Wings Jenkins Pigs Have Wings Doubleday Blandings Castle – Ring for Jeeves Jenkins Simon & Schuster Jeeves – Jeeves and the Feudal Spirit Jenkins Bertie Wooster Sees It Through Simon & Schuster Jeeves – French Leave Jenkins French Leave Simon & Schuster – – Something Fishy Jenkins Simon & Schuster – – Cocktail Time Jenkins Cocktail Time Simon & Schuster Uncle Fred – Jeeves in the Offing Jenkins How Right You Are, Jeeves Simon & Schuster Jeeves – Ice in the Bedroom Jenkins Simon & Schuster – – Service with a Smile Jenkins Service with a Smile Simon & Schuster Blandings Castle and Uncle Fred – Stiff Upper Lip, Jeeves Jenkins Stiff Upper Lip, Jeeves Simon & Schuster Jeeves – Frozen Assets Jenkins Biffen's Millions Simon & Schuster – – Galahad at Blandings Jenkins Simon & Schuster Blandings Castle – Company for Henry Jenkins Simon & Schuster – – Do Butlers Burgle Banks? Jenkins Do Butlers Burgle Banks? Simon & Schuster – – Jenkins No Nudes Is Good Nudes Simon & Schuster Blandings Castle – Barrie & Jenkins Simon & Schuster – – Much Obliged, Jeeves Barrie & Jenkins Jeeves and the Tie That Binds Simon & Schuster Jeeves – Pearls, Girls and Monty Bodkin Barrie & Jenkins Simon & Schuster – – Bachelors Anonymous Barrie & Jenkins Bachelors Anonymous Simon & Schuster – – Aunts Aren't Gentlemen Barrie & Jenkins Simon & Schuster Jeeves – Sunset at Blandings Chatto & Windus Sunset at Blandings Simon & Schuster Blandings Castle Unfinished The Luck Stone Galahad Books – – – – – ==Short story collections== In chronological order by UK publication date, even when the book was published first in the US or serialised in a magazine in advance of publication in book form. Wodehouse's short story collections UK title Year of UK publication UK publisher (All publishers based in London) US title Year of US publication US publisher (All publishers based in New York) Series Notes Tales of St. Austin's A & C Black Tales of St. Austin's Macmillan Publishers School – Methuen Publishing – – – – – Methuen Publishing Doran Jeeves – My Man Jeeves Newnes – – – Jeeves Many rewritten for Carry On, Jeeves Indiscretions of Archie Jenkins Indiscretions of Archie Doran [This book is actually a novel -- an adaptation of a series of short stories which were rewritten to form a cohesive novel] – – Jenkins Golf Without Tears Doran Golf – Jenkins Jeeves Doran Jeeves Wodehouse's biographer, Richard Usborne, considers this a "loosely stitched novel of eighteen chapters which make ten separate stories in The Jeeves Omnibus" Ukridge Jenkins He Rather Enjoyed It Doran – – Carry On, Jeeves Jenkins Carry On, Jeeves Doran Jeeves – Jenkins Divots Doran Golf – Meet Mr Mulliner Jenkins Meet Mr Mulliner Doubleday, Doran Mr. Mulliner – Mr Mulliner Speaking Jenkins Mr Mulliner Speaking Doubleday, Doran Mr. Mulliner – Very Good, Jeeves Jenkins Very Good, Jeeves Doubleday, Doran Jeeves – Mulliner Nights Jenkins Mulliner Nights Doubleday, Doran Mr. Mulliner – Blandings Castle and Elsewhere Jenkins Blandings Castle Doubleday, Doran Blandings Castle and Mr. Mulliner – Young Men in Spats Jenkins Young Men in Spats Doubleday, Doran – – Lord Emsworth and Others Jenkins Crime Wave at Blandings Doubleday, Doran Blandings Castle, Golf, Ukridge – Eggs, Beans and Crumpets Jenkins Eggs, Beans and Crumpets Doubleday, Doran – – Nothing Serious Jenkins Nothing Serious Doubleday, Doran Blandings Castle, Golf, Ukridge – Jenkins Simon & Schuster Jeeves, Ukridge, Mr. Mulliner – Plum Pie Jenkins Plum Pie Simon & Schuster Jeeves, Blandings, Ukridge, Mr. Mulliner Short stories, poems, essay – – – Seabury Press – – A Man of Means Porpoise Books – – – – – Plum Stones Galahad Books – – – – – Tales of Wrykyn and Elsewhere Porpoise Books – – – School – – – – Enter Jeeves 1997 Dover Publications Jeeves, Reggie Pepper Early Jeeves stories and all Reggie Pepper stories Kid Brady Stories and A Man of Means Everyman Books Kid Brady Stories and A Man of Means The Overlook Press Kid Brady – ===Individual short stories=== Wodehouse wrote more than 300 short stories. Many of these stories were originally published in magazines and subsequently published in short story collections. Wodehouse also contributed other works to periodicals such as articles and poems, and some of Wodehouse's novels were originally serialised in magazines as well. ==Plays== thumb|upright|alt=Black and white photograph of Wodehouse looking at the camera|Wodehouse in 1904, aged 23 Plays by Wodehouse Title Location of first performance Date of first performance Year of publication Publisher (All publishers based in London) Notes After the Show Unknown – – By Wodehouse and Herbert Westbrook Playhouse Theatre, New York – – By Wodehouse and John Stapleton; adaptation of Wodehouse's novel A Gentleman of Leisure McVicker's Theater, Chicago – – By Wodehouse and John Stapleton; revival of A Gentleman of Leisure Brother Alfred Savoy Theatre, London – – By Wodehouse and Herbert Westbrook; adaptation of Wodehouse's short story "Rallying Round Old George" Nuts and Wine Empire Theatre, London – – By Wodehouse and C.H. Bovill Have a Heart Liberty Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; music by Jerome Kern Oh Boy! Princess Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; revised for the UK as Oh Joy! Leave It to Jane Longacre Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; music by Jerome Kern Kitty Darlin Teck Theatre, Buffalo, New York New York and Boston: G. Schirmer By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton New Amsterdam Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton Miss 1917 Century Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton Oh, Lady! Lady Princess Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; music by Jerome Kern See You Later Academy of music, Baltimore, Maryland New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton New Amsterdam Theatre, New York New York and London: Chappell & Co By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; revised for the UK as Kissing Time Globe Theatre, New York – – By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton Oh, My Dear! Princess Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton Lyric Theatre New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton Sally New Amsterdam Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse, Guy Bolton, Clifford Grey, Buddy De Sylva and Anne Caldwell; music by Jerome Kern Adelphi Theatre, London London : Ascherberg, Hopwood & Crew By Wodehouse and Fred Thompson Winter Garden Theatre, London London and Sydney: Chappell; New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and George Grossmith; music by Jerome Kern Winter Garden Theatre, London London and Sydney: Chappell; New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and George Grossmith; music by Jerome Kern Sitting Pretty Fulton Theatre, New York New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; music by Jerome Kern Hearts and Diamonds Strand Theatre London: Prowse By Wodehouse and Laurie Wylie; adaptation of The Orlov by Biuno Granichstaedten and Ernst Marischka Henry Miller's Theatre, New York New York: Brentano's Adaptation of a play by Ferenc Molnár Imperial Theatre, New York London and Sydney: Chappell; New York: T.B. Harms By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; music by George Gershwin, lyrics by Ira Gershwin Her Cardboard Lover Empire Theatre, New York – – By Wodehouse and Valerie Wyngate; music by George Gershwin, lyrics by Ira Gershwin; based on Dans sa candeur naïve by Jacques Deval Good Morning, Bill Duke of York's Theatre, London London: Methuen Adapted from a play by Ladislaus Fodor Lyric Theatre, New York London: Chappell By Wodehouse and Clifford Grey; adaptation of The Three Musketeers by Alexandre Dumas New Theatre, London London: Samuel French By Wodehouse and Ian Hay; adaptation of Wodehouse's novel A Damsel in Distress Baa, Baa, Black Sheep New Theatre, London London: Samuel French By Wodehouse and Ian Hay Candle-light Empire Theatre, New York London and New York: Samuel French Adapted from a play by Siegfried Geyer Leave It to Psmith Shaftesbury Theatre, London London: Samuel French By Wodehouse and Ian Hay; adaptation of Wodehouse's novel Leave It to Psmith Who's Who Duke of York's Theatre, London – – By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; adaptation of Wodehouse's novel If I Were You Anything Goes Alvin Theatre New York: Samuel French By Wodehouse, Guy Bolton, Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse; lyrics and music by Cole Porter Saville Theatre, London – – By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; adaptation of Wodehouse's novel Hot Water Arthur – – – – Adapted in 1947 from Jemand by Ferenc Molnár; not produced Game of Hearts – – – – Adapted in 1947 from a play by Ferenc Molnár; not produced Don't Listen, Ladies St James's Theatre, London – – By Wodehouse (as Stephen Powys) and Guy Bolton; adapted from a play by Sacha Guitry Nothing Serious – – – No major productions, but produced in the provinces by touring companies Phipps – – – – By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton in 1951; not produced Come On, Jeeves – – London: Evans By Wodehouse and Guy Bolton; no major productions, but produced in the provinces by touring companies Oh, Clarence! Opera House, Manchester; later Lyric Theatre, London and on tour London: English Theatre Guild Adapted by John Chapman from Blandings Castle stories ==Films== Films written in whole or part by Wodehouse Title Year of release Studio Notes Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Co. Based on the play A Gentleman of Leisure by John Stapleton and Wodehouse Albert Capellani Productions Based on Wodehouse's 1919 novel A Damsel in Distress Piccadilly Jim Selznick Pictures Based on Wodehouse's 1917 novel Piccadilly Jim Jesse D. Hampton Productions Based on Wodehouse's 1912 novel The Prince and Betty Oh, Lady, Lady Realart Pictures Based on the play Oh, Lady! Lady!! by Guy Bolton, Jerome Kern and Wodehouse Paramount Pictures Based on the play A Gentleman of Leisure by John Stapleton and Wodehouse Sascha-Film / Phoebus Film German-Danish-Austrian film. Based on the short story "The Making of Mac's" from The Man with Two Left Feet Oh, Kay! First National Pictures Based on Wodehouse's 1926 play Oh, Kay! Those Three French Girls Cosmopolitan Productions Dialogue by Wodehouse Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Additional dialogue by Wodehouse Brother Alfred British International Pictures Based on the play Brother Alfred by Herbert Westbrook and Wodehouse Leave It to Me British International Pictures Based on Wodehouse's 1923 novel Leave It to Psmith Summer Lightning British and Dominions Film Corporation Based on Wodehouse's 1929 novel Summer Lightning Anything Goes Paramount Pictures Based on the play Anything Goes by Guy Bolton, Cole Porter and Wodehouse Piccadilly Jim Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Based on Wodehouse's 1917 novel Piccadilly Jim Thank You, Jeeves! 20th Century Fox Based on Wodehouse's 1934 novel Thank You, Jeeves Step Lively, Jeeves 20th Century Fox Based the characters created by Wodehouse RKO Pictures Screenwriter; Based on his 1919 novel A Damsel in Distress Rosalie Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Based on the 1928 musical play Rosalie by George Gershwin, Sigmund Romberg, Ira Gershwin and Wodehouse Thunder and Lightning Svensk Filmindustri Swedish film. Based on Wodehouse's 1929 novel Summer Lightning Anything Goes Paramount Pictures Based on the play Anything Goes by Guy Bolton, Cole Porter and Wodehouse Knightsbridge Films Based on Wodehouse's 1921 novel The Girl on the Boat ==Autobiographies and miscellany== thumb|upright=.85|Wodehouse with his adopted daughter Leonora, 1930 The following is a collection of published autobiographical and miscellaneous work. There are transcripts available of the five broadcasts he made, available online, including through the PG Wodehouse Society (UK). Wodehouse's autobiographical works UK title Year of UK publication UK publisher (All publishers based in London) US title Year of US publication US publisher (All publishers based in New York) Notes Globe Publishing – – – With Herbert Westbrook; collected journalism Louder and Funnier Faber and Faber – – – Articles written for Vanity Fair Bring on the Girls! Jenkins Bring on the Girls! Simon & Schuster Semi-autobiographical stories, in collaboration with Guy Bolton Performing Flea Jenkins Author! Author! Simon & Schuster A collection of letters, with notes Over Seventy Jenkins America, I Like You Simon & Schuster – Hutchinson – – – Poems Yours, Plum: the letters of P.G. Wodehouse Hutchinson – – – Correspondence; edited by Frances Donaldson Hutchinson W. W. Norton & Company Correspondence; edited by Sophie Ratcliffe ==References and sources== ===References=== ===Sources=== * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Category:Bibliographies by writer Category:Bibliographies of British writers Category:P. G. Wodehouse