Phineas Taylor Barnum (; July 5, 1810 – April 7, 1891) was an American showman, businessman and politician remembered for promoting celebrated hoaxes and founding the Barnum & Bailey Circus (1871–2017)North American Theatre Online: Phineas T. Barnum with James Anthony Bailey. He was also an author, publisher and philanthropist, although he said of himself: "I am a showman by profession ... and all the gilding shall make nothing else of me." According to Barnum's critics, his personal aim was "to put money in his own coffers." The adage "there's a sucker born every minute"Shapiro, Fred R. The Yale Book of Quotations. New Haven: Yale UP, 2006. p. 44 has frequently been attributed to him, although no evidence exists that he had indeed coined the phrase. Barnum became a small-business owner in his early twenties and founded a weekly newspaper before moving to New York City in 1834. He embarked on an entertainment career, first with a variety troupe called "Barnum's Grand Scientific and Musical Theater", and soon after by purchasing Scudder's American Museum, which he renamed after himself. He used the museum as a platform to promote hoaxes and human curiosities such as the Fiji mermaid and General Tom Thumb. In 1850, he promoted the American tour of Swedish opera singer Jenny Lind, paying her an unprecedented $1,000 () per night for 150 nights. He suffered economic reversals in the 1850s from unwise investments, as well as years of litigation and public humiliation, but he embarked on a lecture tour as a temperance speaker to emerge from debt. His museum added America's first aquarium and expanded its wax-figure department. Barnum served two terms in the Connecticut legislature in 1865 as a Republican for Fairfield, Connecticut. He spoke before the legislature concerning the ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which abolished slavery and involuntary servitude: "A human soul, 'that God has created and Christ died for,' is not to be trifled with. It may tenant the body of a Chinaman, a Turk, an Arab, or a Hottentot—it is still an immortal spirit." He was elected in 1875 as mayor of Bridgeport, Connecticut, where he worked to improve the water supply, bring gas lighting to streets and enforce liquor and prostitution laws. He was also instrumental in the inception of Bridgeport Hospital in 1878 and was its first president. However, the circus business, begun when he was 60 years old, was the source of much of his enduring fame. He established "P.T. Barnum's Grand Traveling Museum, Menagerie, Caravan & Hippodrome" in 1870, a traveling circus, menagerie and museum of "freaks" that adopted many names over the years. Barnum was married to Charity Hallett from 1829 until her death in 1873, and they had four children. In 1874, a few months after his wife's death, he married Nancy Fish, his friend's daughter and 40 years his junior. They were married until 1891 when Barnum died of a stroke at his home. He was buried in Mountain Grove Cemetery, Bridgeport, which he designed himself. ==Early life== Barnum was born in Bethel, Connecticut, the son of innkeeper, tailor and storekeeper Philo Barnum (1778–1826) and Philo's second wife Irene Taylor. Barnum's maternal grandfather Phineas Taylor was a Whig, legislator, landowner, justice of the peace and lottery schemer who had a great influence on him. Barnum ran several businesses, including a general store, a book-auctioning trade, real estate speculation and a statewide lottery network. He started a weekly newspaper in 1829 called The Herald of Freedom in Danbury, Connecticut. His editorials against the elders of local churches led to libel suits and prosecution, and he was imprisoned for two months. He sold his store in 1834. He began his career as a showman in 1835 at the age of 25 with the purchase and exhibition of a blind and almost completely paralyzed slave woman named Joice Heth, whom an acquaintance was billing around Philadelphia as George Washington's 161 year-old former nurse. Slavery was already outlawed in New York, but Barnum exploited a loophole that allowed him to lease Heth for a year for $1,000, borrowing $500 to complete the sale. Barnum forced her to work for 10 to 12 hours per day, and she died in February 1836 at no more than 80 years of age. Barnum hosted a live autopsy of Heth's body in a New York saloon to demonstrate her actual age before spectators paying 50 cents each. ==Showman== Barnum had a year of mixed success with his first variety troupe, Barnum's Grand Scientific and Musical Theater, followed by the Panic of 1837 and three years of difficult circumstances. He purchased Scudder's American Museum in 1841, located at Broadway and Ann Street in Manhattan. He improved the museum, upgrading the building and adding exhibits, and renamed it Barnum's American Museum which became a popular showplace. He added a lighthouse lamp that attracted attention up and down Broadway and flags along the roof's edge that attracted attention in daytime, while giant paintings of animals between the upper windows drew attention from pedestrians. The roof was transformed to a strolling garden with a view of the city, where Barnum launched hot-air balloon rides daily. A changing series of live acts and curiosities were added to the exhibits of stuffed animals, including albinos, giants, little people, jugglers, magicians, exotic women, detailed models of cities and famous battles and a menagerie of animals. ===Fiji mermaid and Tom Thumb=== In 1842 Barnum introduced his first major hoax: a creature with the body of a monkey and the tail of a fish known as the "Feejee" mermaid. He leased it from fellow museum owner Moses Kimball of Boston who became his friend, confidant and collaborator.Schweitzer, Marlis. "Barnum's Last Laugh? General Tom Thumb's Wedding Cake in the Library of Congress." Performing Arts Resources 2011; 28.: 116. Associates Programs Source Plus. Web. December 8, 2012. Barnum justified his hoaxes by calling them advertisements to draw attention to the museum. He said, "I don't believe in duping the public, but I believe in first attracting and then pleasing them." He followed the mermaid act by exhibiting the four-year-old dwarf Charles Stratton, billed as the 11-year-old General Tom Thumb. Stratton was taught to imitate famous figures such as Hercules and Napoleon. In 1843, Barnum hired the Indian dancer fu-Hum- Me, the first of many Indians that he would present. During 1844–45, he toured with General Tom Thumb in Europe and met Queen Victoria, who was amused but saddened by Stratton, and the event was a publicity coup. It opened the door to visits with royalty throughout Europe, including the tsar of Russia, and enabled Barnum to acquire many new attractions, including automatons and other mechanical marvels. During this time, he bought other museums, including that of artist Rembrandt Peale's in Philadelphia, the nation's first major museum. By late 1846, Barnum's American Museum was drawing 400,000 visitors per year. ===Jenny Lind=== Barnum became aware of the popularity of Jenny Lind, the "Swedish Nightingale", during his European tour with Tom Thumb when her career was at its height in Europe. Barnum, admittedly unmusical, had never heard Lind's voiceRogers, Francis. "Jenny Lind", The Musical Quarterly, Vol. 32, No. 3 (July 1946), pp. 437–48 but he offered her the chance sing in the U.S. at $1,000 a night for 150 nights, with all expenses paid. He wished to exploit Lind's reputation for morality and philanthropy in his publicity. Lind demanded the fee in advance and Barnum agreed. She used the fee to raise a fund for charities, principally endowing schools for poor children in Sweden.Miller, Philip L. "Review: P. T. Barnum Presents Jenny Lind: The American Tour of the Swedish Nightingale", American Music, Spring 1983, pp. 78–80 Barnum borrowed heavily on his mansion and his museum to raise the money to pay Lind but he was still short of funds, so he persuaded a Philadelphia minister that Lind would be a positive influence on American morals, and the minister lent him the final $6,000. The contract also afforded Lind the option of withdrawing from the tour after 60 or 100 performances, paying Barnum $50,000 if she did so. Lind and her small company sailed to the U.S. in September 1850, but she was a celebrity before she arrived following Barnum's months of preparations. Nearly 40,000 people greeted her at the docks and another 20,000 at her hotel, and merchandise was sold . When Lind realized how much money stood to earn from the tour, she insisted upon a new agreement, which he signed on September 3, 1850. This paid her the original fee plus the remainder of each concert's profits after Barnum's $5,500 management fee. She was determined to accumulate as much money as possible for her charities. right|thumb|250px|Parody of Lind's first American tour for Barnum, New York City, October 1850 The tour began with a concert at Castle Garden on September 11, 1850, and it was a major success, recouping Barnum four times his investment. Washington Irving proclaimed, "She is enough to counterbalance, of herself, all the evil that the world is threatened with by the great convention of women. So God save Jenny Lind!" Tickets for some of her concerts were in such demand that Barnum sold them at auction, and public enthusiasm was so strong that the press coined the term "Lind mania."Linkon, Sherry Lee. "Reading Lind Mania: Print Culture and the Construction of Eighteenth-Century Audiences", Book History, Vol. 1 (1998), pp. 94–106 The blatant commercialism of Barnum's ticket auctions distressed Lind, and she persuaded him to reserve a substantial portion of tickets at reduced prices."Jenny Lind's Progress in America", The Observer, October 6, 1850, p. 3 On the tour, Barnum's publicity always preceded Lind's arrival and generated enthusiasm, as he had as many as 26 journalists on his payroll.Hambrick, Keith S. "P. T. Barnum Presents Jenny Lind – The American Tour of the Swedish Nightingale", Louisiana History: The Journal of the Louisiana Historical Association, Vol. 22, No. 2 (Spring, 1981), pp. 208–09 After New York, the company toured the East Coast with continued success and later traveled through the southern states and Cuba. By early 1851, Lind had become uncomfortable with Barnum's relentless marketing of the tour, and she invoked a contractual right to sever her ties with him. They parted amicably, and she continued the tour for nearly a year under her own management. Lind performed 93 concerts in the U.S. for Barnum, earning her about $350,000, while Barnum netted at least $500,000 ()."America", The Times, June 28, 1851, p. 5 ===Diversified activities=== Barnum's next challenge was to change public attitudes about the theater, which was widely regarded as a salacious enterprise. He wanted theaters to become palaces of edification and delight as respectable middle-class entertainment. He built New York City's largest and most modern theater, naming it the Moral Lecture Room. Barnum hoped that this would avoid seedy connotations, attract a family crowd and win the approval of the city's moral crusaders. He started the nation's first theatrical matinées to encourage families and to lessen the fear of crime. The theater opened with The Drunkard, a thinly disguised temperance lecture (Barnum had become a teetotaler after returning from Europe). He followed it with melodramas, farces and historical plays performed by highly regarded actors. He edited Shakespearean plays and others such as Uncle Tom's Cabin to render them more palatable for family audiences. Barnum organized flower shows, beauty contests, dog shows and poultry contests, but the most popular were baby contests. In 1853 he started the pictorial weekly newspaper Illustrated News. He completed his autobiography one year later, which sold more than one million copies over the course of numerous revisions. Mark Twain loved the book, but the British Examiner thought it "trashy" and "offensive" and wrote that it inspired "nothing but sensations of disgust" and "sincere pity for the wretched man who compiled it." In the early 1850s, Barnum began investing to develop East Bridgeport, Connecticut. He extended substantial loans to the Jerome Clock Company to lure it to move to his new industrial area, but the company went bankrupt by 1856, taking Barnum's wealth with it. This began four years of litigation and public humiliation. Ralph Waldo Emerson proclaimed that Barnum's downfall showed "the gods visible again" and other critics celebrated Barnum's public dilemma. However, Tom Thumb offered his services, as he was touring on his own, and the two began another European tour. Barnum also started a lecture tour, mostly as a temperance speaker. By 1860, he emerged from debt and built a mansion that he called Lindencroft, and he resumed ownership of his museum. Barnum created America's first aquarium and expanded the wax figure section of his museum. His "Seven Grand Salons" demonstrated the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. The collections expanded to four buildings, and he published a museum guidebook that claimed 850,000 "curiosities." Late in 1860, Siamese twins Chang and Eng emerged from retirement and appeared at Barnum's museum for six weeks. Also in 1860, Barnum introduced Zip the Pinhead, a microcephalic black man who spoke a mysterious language created by Barnum. In 1862, Barnum discovered giantess Anna Swan and dwarfCommodore Nutt, a new Tom Thumb with whom Barnum visited president Abraham Lincoln at the White House. During the Civil War, Barnum's museum drew large audiences seeking diversion from the conflict. He added pro-Union exhibits, lectures and dramas, and he demonstrated commitment to the cause. He hired Pauline Cushman in 1864, an actress who had served as a spy for the Union, to lecture about her "thrilling adventures" behind Confederate lines. Barnum's Unionist sympathies incited a Confederate sympathizer to start a fire in 1864. Barnum's American Museum burned to the ground on July 13, 1865 from a fire of unknown origin. Barnum reestablished it at another location in New York City, but this was also destroyed by fire in March 1868. The loss was too great the second time, and Barnum retired from the museum business. ==Circus== thumb|right|Share of the Barnum and Bailey Ltd, issued January 24, 1902 Barnum did not enter the circus business until he was 60 years old. He established "P. T. Barnum's Grand Traveling Museum, Menagerie, Caravan & Hippodrome" in Delavan, Wisconsin in 1870 with William Cameron Coup. It was a traveling circus, menagerie and museum of "freaks" that assumed various names: "P. T. Barnum's Travelling World's Fair, Great Roman Hippodrome and Greatest Show on Earth", and "P. T. Barnum's Greatest Show on Earth, and the Great London Circus, Sanger's Royal British Menagerie and the Grand International Allied Shows United" after an 1881 merger with James Bailey and James L. Hutchinson, soon shortened to "Barnum & Bailey's." This was the first circus to display three rings. The show's first primary attraction was Jumbo, an African elephant that Barnum purchased in 1882 from the London Zoo. The Barnum and Bailey Circus still contained acts similar to his Traveling Menagerie, including acrobats, freak shows and General Tom Thumb. Barnum persisted in growing the circus in spite of more fires, train disasters and other setbacks, and he was aided by circus professionals who ran the daily operations. He and Bailey parted ways in 1885, but they rejoined in 1888 with the "Barnum & Bailey Greatest Show on Earth", later the Barnum & Bailey Circus, which toured the world. Barnum was among the first circus owners to move his circus by train, a suggestion by Bailey and other business partners, and probably the first to own his own train. He became known as the "Shakespeare of Advertising" because of his innovative and impressive ideas. ==Author and debunker== Barnum wrote several books, including Life of P. T. Barnum (1855), The Humbugs of the World (1865), Struggles and Triumphs (1869), Forest and Jungle, or, Thrilling Adventures in All Quarters of the GlobeForest and jungle, or, Thrilling adventures in all quarters of the globe : An illustrated history of the animal kingdom, written in easy and instructive form for boys and girls. and The Art of Money-Getting (1880).The Art of Money-Getting Barnum was often called the Prince of Humbugs and felt that entertainers and vendors perpetrating hoaxes (or "humbugs") in promotional material were justified if the public received value in return. However, he was contemptuous of those who accrued money through fraud, especially the spiritualist mediums popular in his day. He testified against noted "spirit photographer" William H. Mumler in his trial for fraud, and he exposed the tricks employed by mediums to cheat the bereaved. In The Humbugs of the World, Barnum offered $500 () to any medium who could prove the power to communicate with the dead. == Role in politics == Barnum was significantly involved in politics. He mainly focused on race, slavery and sectionalism in the period preceding the American Civil War. He opposed the Kansas–Nebraska Act of 1854, which supported slavery, and left the Democratic Party because it had endorsed slavery. Barnum joined the new anti-slavery Republican Party. Barnum claimed that "politics were always distasteful to me", but he was elected to the Connecticut General Assembly in 1865 as a Republican representing Fairfield. He hired spies to acquire insider information on the New York and New Haven Railroad lines and exposed a secret that would raise fares by 20 percent. He said during the ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution: "A human soul, 'that God has created and Christ died for,' is not to be trifled with. It may tenant the body of a Chinaman, a Turk, an Arab or a Hottentot—it is still an immortal spirit." He also acknowledged that he had owned slaves when he lived in the South: "I whipped my slaves. I ought to have been whipped a thousand times for this myself. But then I was a Democrat—one of those nondescript Democrats, who are Northern men with Southern principles." Barnum was elected for the next four Connecticut legislature sessions and succeeded senator Orris S. Ferry. He was the legislative sponsor of an 1879 law that prohibited the use of "any drug, medicinal article or instrument for the purpose of preventing conception" and also criminalized acting as an accessory to the use of contraception. This law remained in effect in Connecticut until it was overturned in 1965 by the U.S. Supreme Court in its Griswold v. Connecticut decision. Barnum campaigned for the U.S. Congress in 1867 and lost to his third cousin William Henry Barnum. In 1875, he served as mayor of Bridgeport, Connecticut to improve the water supply, bring gas lighting to streets and enforce liquor and prostitution laws. He was instrumental in the inception of Bridgeport Hospital, founded in 1878, and was its first president. ==Profitable philanthropy== Barnum enjoyed what he publicly dubbed "profitable philanthropy," saying: "If by improving and beautifying our city Bridgeport, Connecticut, and adding to the pleasure and prosperity of my neighbors, [and] I can do so at a profit, the incentive to 'good works' will be twice as strong as if it were otherwise." He was appointed to the board of trustees to Tufts University prior to its founding, and he extended several significant contributions to the school, including a gift of $50,000 () in 1883 to establish a museum (later known as Barnum Museum of Natural History) and hall for the department of natural history. Tufts made Jumbo the Elephant the school's mascot, and Tufts students are known as Jumbos. ==Personal life and death== On November 8, 1829, Barnum married Charity Hallett, and they had four children: Caroline Cornelia (1833–1911), Helen Maria (1840–1915), Frances Irena (1842–1844) and Pauline Taylor (1846–1877). His wife died on November 19, 1873, and the following year, he married Nancy Fish, the daughter of his close friend John Fish and 40 years her senior. Barnum died from a stroke at home in 1891 at the age of 80. He is buried in Mountain Grove Cemeteryin Bridgeport, Connecticut, a cemetery that he designed. ==Legacy== Barnum built four mansions in Bridgeport, Connecticut: Iranistan, Lindencroft, Waldemere and Marina. Iranistan was the most notable, a Moorish Revival architecture designed by Leopold Eidlitz with domes, spires and lacy fretwork inspired by the Royal Pavilion in Brighton, England. It was built in 1848 but it was destroyed by fire in 1857.Barnum Museum Core Exhibits The Marina was demolished by the University of Bridgeport in 1964 in order to build a cafeteria. At his death, critics praised Barnum for his philanthropy and called him an icon of American spirit and ingenuity. He asked the Evening Sun to print his obituary just prior to his death so that he might read it. On April 7, 1891, Barnum asked about the box-office receipts for the day, and a few hours later, he died. In 1893, a statue in Barnum's honor was erected by his former partners James Bailey, James A. Hutchinson and W. W. Cole at Seaside Park in Bridgeport. Barnum had donated the land for the park in 1865. His circus was sold to Ringling Brothers on July 8, 1907 for $400,000 (). The Ringling Brothers and Barnum & Bailey circuses ran separately until they merged in 1919, forming the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus. The United States Mint issued a commemorative coin in 1936 for Bridgeport's centennial celebration with Barnum's portrait for the obverse. Cartoonist Walt Kelly, a Bridgeport native, named a character in Barnum's honor in his Pogo comic strip. An annual six-week Barnum Festival was held for many years in Bridgeport.Michael Knight, "Barnum Festival Revels in Hoopla and Humbug", The New York Times, June 20, 1975, p. 35. The Bethel Historical Society commissioned a life-sized sculpture to honor the 200th anniversary of his birth, created by local resident David Gesualdi and placed outside the public library. The statue was dedicated on September 26, 2010. Barnum cofounded the Bridgeport & Port Jefferson Steamboat Company in 1883 with Charles E. Tooker, a company that continues to operate across the Long Island Sound between Port Jefferson, New York and Bridgeport. The company owns and operates three vessels, one of which is named the M.V. PT Barnum. The Barnum Museum in Bridgeport houses many of his oddities and curiosities. ==In popular culture== ===Films and television=== * A Lady's Morals (1930) – played by Wallace Beery * Jenny Lind (1932) – played by André Berley * The Mighty Barnum (1934) – played again by Wallace Beery * The Greatest Show on Earth (1952) – centers on a fictionalized version of the contemporary Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus, although Barnum is neither the subject of the film nor a character in it * Jules Verne's Rocket to the Moon (1967) – played by Burl Ives * Barnum! (1986) – played by Michael Crawford; a filmed version of the Broadway musical (see below), filmed in London * Barnum (1986) – played by Burt Lancaster; made-for-TV movie * P.T. Barnum (1999) – played by Beau Bridges; made-for-TV movie * Gangs of New York (2002) – played by Roger Ashton-Griffiths * The Greatest Showman (2017) – a musical loosely based around Barnum and his circus. Hugh Jackman plays Barnum and coproduced the film * I Didn't See You There (2022) – a disabled filmmaker from Barnum's hometown of Bethel meditates on the ableist legacy of the freak show ===Theater=== * Barnum (1980) – Broadway musical based on Barnum's life starring Jim Dale ===Books=== * The Great and Only Barnum; the Tremendous, Stupendous Life of Showman P. T. Barnum ===Music=== * "U.S. Blues" – a song from the album From the Mars Hotel by the Grateful Dead ==Publications== * The Life of P. T. Barnum: Written by Himself. Originally published New York: Redfield, 1855. Reprint: Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2000. . * Struggles and Triumphs, or Forty Years' Recollections of P. T. Barnum. Originally published 1869. Reprint: Whitefish, MT: Kessinger, 2003. (Part 1) and (Part 2). . * Art of Money Getting, or, Golden Rules for Making Money. Originally published 1880. Reprint: Bedford, MA: Applewood, 1999. . * The Wild Beasts, Birds, and Reptiles of the World: The Story of Their Capture. Pub. 1888, R. S. Peale & Company, Chicago. * Why I Am a Universalist. Originally published 1890. Reprint: Kessinger Pub Co. . ==See also== * Barnum effect * Barnum's Aquarial Gardens, Boston, Massachusetts (1862–1863) * Cardiff Giant * Carl Hagenbeck * Colonel Routh Goshen * Fedor Jeftichew * Human zoo * Isaac W. Sprague * Jenny Lind private railroad car * Lucia Zarate * Nellie Keeler * The Greatest Show on Earth, 1952 film * Wild Men of Borneo * Zip the Pinhead ==References== == Further reading == * Adams, Bluford. E Pluribus Barnum: The Great Showman and the Making of U.S. Popular Culture. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1997. . * Alderson, William T., ed. Mermaids, Mummies, and Mastodons: The Emergence of the American Museum. Washington, DC: American Association of Museums for the Baltimore City Life Museums, 1992. * Barnum, Patrick Warren. Barnum Genealogy: 650 Years of Family History. Boston: Higginson Book Co., 2006. (hardcover), (softcover), * Benton, Joel. The Life of Phineas T. Barnum, . * Betts, John Rickards. "P. T. Barnum and the Popularization of Natural History", Journal of the History of Ideas 20, no. 3 (1959): 353–368. * * Cook, James W. The Arts of Deception: Playing with Fraud in the Age of Barnum. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001. . Relates Barnum's Fiji Mermaid and What Is It? exhibits to other popular arts of the nineteenth century, including magic shows and trompe-l'œil paintings. * Harding, Les. Elephant Story: Jumbo and P. T. Barnum Under the Big Top. Jefferson, NC.: McFarland & Co., 2000. . (129 p.) * Harris, Neil. Humbug: The Art of P. T. Barnum. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1973. . * * * Reiss, Benjamin. The Showman and the Slave: Race, Death, and Memory in Barnum's America. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001. . Focuses on Barnum's exhibition of Joice Heth. * Saxon, Arthur H. P. T. Barnum: The Legend and the Man. New York: Columbia University Press, 1995. . * Uchill, Ida Libert. Howdy, Sucker! What P. T. Barnum Did in Colorado. Denver: Pioneer Peddler Press, 2001. * Jefferson, Margo. On Michael Jackson. New York: Pantheon, 2006. . Critique of Michael Jackson, including his obsession with P. T. Barnum and "Freaks." * The Colossal P. T. Barnum Reader: Nothing Else Like It in the Universe. Ed. by James W. Cook. Champaign, University of Illinois Press, 2005. . * Woolf, John. The Wonders: Lifting the Curtain on the Freak Show, Circus and Victorian Age (London: Michael O'Mara, 2019) ==External links== ;Digital collections * * * * ;Physical collections * The Barnum Museum * Phineas Taylor Barnum papers, 1818–1993 * Barnum's American Museum * The Lost Museum – A virtual reproduction of Barnum's American Museum; includes a collection of primary source materials ;Biographical information * P. T. Barnum's genealogy at the Barnum Family Genealogy website * * P. T. Barnum at Ringling Brothers and Barnum and Bailey Circus * Entry on P. T. Barnum in the Concise Encyclopedia of Tufts History * Full text of The Life of Phineas T. Barnum by Joel Benton, from Project Gutenberg ;Scholarship and analysis * Barnum's circus affiliation * P.T. Barnum – Ultrarunning Promoter (1874) * House of Deception – An article about Barnum's handwriting & signature * P. T. Barnum did not say "There's a sucker born every minute" * P. T. Barnum, the Shakespeare of Advertising * P. T. Barnum and Henry Bergh Bergh was founder of the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA). ;Other links * Facebook Page Bethel Historical Society, P. T. Barnum Monument, "P. T. Barnum – The Lost Legend" Documentary. * An 1890 recording of Barnum's voice * Marina Mansion * Tribute to Ringling Bros.and Barnum & Bailey Circus by brothers Charles Elias Disney & Daniel H. Disney * * Category:1810 births Category:1891 deaths Category:American entertainment industry businesspeople Category:19th-century American memoirists Category:Burials at Mountain Grove Cemetery, Bridgeport Category:Connecticut Democrats Category:Connecticut Republicans Category:Mayors of Bridgeport, Connecticut Category:Members of the Connecticut House of Representatives Category:Businesspeople from Bridgeport, Connecticut Category:People from Fairfield, Connecticut Category:Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus Category:Members of the Universalist Church of America Category:19th-century Christian universalists Category:19th-century American people Category:19th-century American politicians Category:Circus owners Category:American slave owners Category:American abolitionists Category:Christian abolitionists Category:19th-century American businesspeople Category:Museum founders