Tan Sri Datuk Amar Teuku Zakaria bin Teuku Nyak Puteh (later Ramlee bin Puteh) (22 March 1929 – 29 May 1973), better known by his stage name P. Ramlee (Puteh Ramlee), was a Malaysian actor, filmmaker, musician, and composer famous in modern-day Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia and Southern Thailand. Born in Penang, Malaya, he is regarded as a prominent icon of Malay language entertainment. His contributions to the film and music industry began when he made his acting debut in Singapore for Malay Film Productions in 1948. He reached the height of his career there throughout the 1950s before declining in the 1960s when he moved to Kuala Lumpur to work for Merdeka Film Productions. Although acclaimed for his career in Singapore, Ramlee was denounced in Malaysia during his life, with his career only facing retrospective resurgence there decades after his death. ==Early life== Ramlee was born on 22 March 1929 to Teuku Nyak Puteh Bin Teuku Karim (1902–1955) and Che Mah Binti Hussein (1904–1967). His father, Teuku Nyak Puteh, who was a descendant of a wealthy family in Aceh, migrated from Lhokseumawe in Aceh, Indonesia, to settle in Penang, where he married Ramlee’s mother, who hailed from Kubang Buaya, Butterworth, North Seberang Perai and were domiciled at the Sungai Pinang suburb of the capital, Georgetown (where his birthplace museum still stands today). Ramlee received his education from the Sekolah Melayu Kampung Jawa (Kampung Jawa Malay School), Francis Light English School and then to Penang Free School; in all he was registered as "Ramlee" by his father, because his name Teuku Zakaria was not suitable with other children at that time. Reportedly a reluctant and naughty student, Ramlee was nevertheless talented and interested in music and football. His studies at the Penang Free School were interrupted by the Japanese occupation from 1942 to 1945, during which he enrolled in the Japanese navy school (Kaigun Gakko). He also learnt the basics of music and to sing Japanese songs during this period with his teacher, Hirahe-san. When the war ended, he took music lessons that enabled him to read musical notations. === Name === He abbreviated his name to P. Ramlee (Puteh Ramlee), taking inspiration from the Tamil patronymic naming conventions, where the initial stood for his father's name (Puteh) and was followed by his given name (Ramlee). ==Career== By 1948, the 19 year-old Ramlee had already won a number of singing competitions, and was writing his own songs and playing the violin in a kroncong band. That year, B. S. Rajhans, a film director for the Malay Film Productions (MFP) came across P. Ramlee at a singing competition hosted by Radio Malaya in Bukit Mertajam, Penang. Rajhans placed Ramlee in a supporting role in his film Chinta ("Love"), in which he played a villain, and he also performed five songs as a playback singer providing vocals for the lead actor . In 1950, Ramlee played his first major role in the film directed by , Bakti ("Devotion"). In Bakti, he was the first actor to sing in his own voice instead of relying on playback singer. In the following films, such as Juwita in 1951 and Ibu ("Mother") in 1953, he became established as a major star of the Malay film industry. Between 1948 and 1955, he starred in a total of 27 films. Aside from acting, Ramlee was a prolific songwriter, and around 500 of his songs have been recorded, either by himself or by other artists. Ramlee himself recorded 359 songs for his films and records. Among his best known songs are "", "", "Engkau Laksana Bulan", "", "Tudung Periok", "" and "Azizah". The songs Ramlee wrote were featured in his films, performed by Ramlee himself or by other artists. In Hang Tuah which was directed by , Ramlee won best musical score at the Asia-Pacific Film Festival. P. Ramlee started directing feature films in 1955, the first of which was ("Trishaw Man"), which was praised as the best Malay film of the year. Ramlee wrote the screenplay for the film based on a story by Lu Xun. He also directed and starred in the Bujang Lapok comedy series. One of these, Pendekar Bujang Lapok, won the Best Comedy award at the Asia-Pacific Film Festival. He also won the Best Actor award for Anak-ku Sazali at the festival. Other significant films he directed for MFP include Antara Dua Darjat, Ibu Mertua-ku and Tiga Abdul. thumb|Portrait of P. Ramlee Ramlee's career at the Malay Film Productions in Singapore between 1955 and 1964 was considered his "golden age" when he made his most critically acclaimed films and wrote his best-remembered songs. In 1964, he left Singapore for Kuala Lumpur to make films with Merdeka Film Productions, however, he was less successful there and faced constant sabotage from other Malaysian artists. He made 18 films with Merdeka, and his last film was Laksamana Do Re Mi. His last song was "Ayer Mata di Kuala Lumpur" ("Tears in Kuala Lumpur") intended for a film of the same name before he died in 1973. In all, Ramlee starred in 62 films and directed 33. When Laksamana Do Re Mi was nominated at the 1973 Asia Pacific Film Festival, Ramlee was ignored by other Malaysian artists in attendance, and he subsequently decided to sit with Singaporean artists instead, with foreign artists (from Hong Kong and Japan) giving him more recognition as well. ==Death and legacy== Before dawn of 29 May 1973, P. Ramlee died at the age of 44 from a heart attack and was buried at Jalan Ampang Muslim Cemetery, in Kuala Lumpur. At the time of his death, Ramlee's career was generally ignored by the Malaysian entertainment industry, and had largely been denounced out of jealousy from other Malaysian artists. It was only during the late 1980s, two decades after his death, that his contributions became much more honoured. In the late 1980s, the P. Ramlee Memorial or Pustaka Peringatan P. Ramlee was built in his home in Setapak, Kuala Lumpur. In 1992, the street Jalan Parry, in the center of Kuala Lumpur, was renamed Jalan P. Ramlee in his honour. In 1990, he was posthumously awarded the Malaysian honorific title Tan Sri, and then in 2009, the honorific title of "Datuk Amar" by Sarawak State Government. Then Chief Minister of Sarawak, Abdul Taib Mahmud, an avid fan of Ramlee, presented the award to his adopted daughter, Dian P. Ramlee, in a ceremony honouring veteran artists in Kuching. The P. Ramlee House is a museum situated along Jalan P. Ramlee (formerly Caunter Hall road) in Penang, Malaysia. The building is a restored wooden house that was originally built in 1926 by his father and uncle. The house had previously undergone multiple repairs before being taken over by the National Archives as an extension of its P. Ramlee Memorial project in Kuala Lumpur. Items on display at the house include personal memorabilia related to his life in Penang and items belonging to his family. On 22 March 2017; his 88th birthday, Google honored P. Ramlee with a Doodle on the Malaysian Google homepage. In 2021, Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) honoured him with their limited-time menu, the Burger P. Ramlee — a combination between KFC Zinger and P. Ramlee's favourite dish, the Nasi Kandar where it is available in four combos — À'la Carte, Kombo, Set Legenda and Kombo Ikon. ==Filmography== P. Ramlee was involved in many aspects of his films: as scriptwriter, director, actor as well as music composer and singer. He was involved in 62 films throughout his career as an actor, as well as a number of other films in other capacities. ==Awards== * : **50px Member of the Order of the Defender of the Realm (AMN) (1962) **50px Commander of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia (PSM) – Tan Sri (1990; posthumously) **P. Ramlee was posthumously granted the sobriquet Seniman Agung. * : **50px Knight Commander of the Order of the Star of Hornbill Sarawak (DA) – Datuk Amar (2009; posthumously) ==Entities named after P. Ramlee== thumb|P. Ramlee Street in Kuala Lumpur Various places are named after Ramlee * Jalan P. Ramlee, Penang (formerly known as Caunter Hall; renamed on 30 August 1983) * Jalan P. Ramlee, Kuala Lumpur (formerly known as Jalan Parry; renamed in 1982) * Bangunan P. Ramlee and Bilik Mesyuarat Tan Sri P. Ramlee at Sekolah Kebangsaan Hulu Klang, Selangor (used as background in Masam Masam Manis) * Jalan P. Ramlee, Kuching, Sarawak (formerly known as Jalan Jawa) * Taman P. Ramlee (formerly Taman Furlong) a townships at Setapak, Kuala Lumpur and George Town, Penang * Pawagam Mini P. Ramlee at Studio Merdeka, FINAS, Ulu Klang, Selangor * Makmal P.Ramlee at Filem Negara Malaysia, Petaling Jaya, Selangor * P. Ramlee Auditorium (formerly known as RTM Auditorium), Angkasapuri * SK Tan Sri P. Ramlee, Georgetown, Penang (formerly SK Kampung Jawa, his alma mater; renamed on 13 November 2011) * Ramlee Mall at Suria KLCC shopping centre, Kuala Lumpur * Bukit Nanas Monorail station, Kuala Lumpur, formerly known as P. Ramlee Monorail station * Auditorium P. Ramlee, RTM Kuching, Sarawak ==References== ==External links== * P.Ramlee's Profile, sinemamalaysia.com.my (Malay language) * P. Ramlee Cyber Museum * P. Ramlee: Namamu Dijulang, Jasamu Dikenang Astro special tribute Program, October 2010 * Category:Malaysian people of Acehnese descent Category:Malaysian people of Malay descent Category:1929 births Category:1973 deaths Category:Malaysian male film actors Category:Malaysian film directors Category:Malaysian musicians Category:Malaysian film score composers Category:Malaysian singer-songwriters Category:Malaysian film producers Category:Malaysian expatriates in Singapore Category:Acehnese people Category:People from Penang Category:Members of the Order of the Defender of the Realm Category:Commanders of the Order of Loyalty to the Crown of Malaysia Category:Knights Commander of the Order of the Star of Hornbill Sarawak Category:20th-century Malaysian male actors Category:Malay-language film directors Category:Malay Film Productions contract players Category:Merdeka Film Productions contract players Category:Male film score composers