PAW Patrol is a Canadian computer-animated children's television series created by Keith Chapman and produced by Spin Master Entertainment, with animation provided by Guru Studio. In Canada, the series is primarily broadcast on TVOntario as part of the TVOKids programing block. TVO first ran previews of the show in August 2013. The series premiered on Nickelodeon in the United States on August 12, 2013. The series focuses on a young boy named Ryder who leads a crew of search and rescue dogs that call themselves the PAW Patrol. They work together on missions to protect the shoreside community of Adventure Bay and surrounding areas. Each dog has a specific set of skills based on emergency services professions, such as a firefighter, a police officer, and an aviation pilot. They all reside in doghouses that transform into customized vehicles, or "pupmobiles", for their missions. They are also equipped with special hi-tech backpacks called "pup packs" that contain tools relating to the pups' jobs. Spin Master has developed the show into a media franchise and released an ongoing line of toys based on it. PAW Patrol toy sales have generated millions of dollars in revenue for the corporation and increased Spin Master's presence in the preschool toy market. The show, and its associated products, have received a variety of awards and nominations from associations such as the Academy of Canadian Cinema & Television and the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. On March 24, 2022, the series has been renewed for a tenth season. A theatrical feature film, titled PAW Patrol: The Movie, was released on August 20, 2021, with a sequel, PAW Patrol: The Mighty Movie, scheduled to release theatrically on September 29, 2023. A spin-off series titled Rubble & Crew premiered in February 2023 which featured primarily Rubble, one of the PAW Patrol pups, and his crew of Bulldogs. On February 24, 2023, the series was renewed for an eleventh season to air in spring 2024. In early February 2023, series creator Keith Chapman said in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter magazine that the series could still be on television for another ten years or more. ==Plot== Each episode of PAW Patrol follows a similar pattern. Episodes normally open with a scene depicting the dogs going about their everyday lives in Adventure Bay, often playing with dog toys or going to the local playground. Ryder, a ten-year-old boy, is advised of a problem by receiving a call for help or by witnessing a situation himself. His most frequent callers are an accident-prone marine biologist named Cap'n Turbot and the town's mayor, Mayor Goodway. Ryder always alerts the dogs via their blinking pet tags. The team members report to their base, the Lookout, and enter its elevator. Marshall typically arrives last causing a humorous mishap that makes the other pups laugh as the elevator rises, although Rubble causes the elevator gag in some episodes. When they reach the top floor, they arrange themselves in a line. Chase announces that the team is ready for action as Ryder tells the pups what has happened. He chooses several members of the team, normally two first responders, to help solve whatever problem has emerged. They ride a slide down to their vehicles and complete their mission. The PAW Patrol's missions include rescuing people, stopping different dangers, and thwarting the devious plots of Mayor Humdinger of Foggy Bottom in later episodes. When they have finished, Ryder says his catchphrase: "Whenever you're in trouble, just yelp for help!" (or a variation of that in later episodes). Then Ryder congratulates the pups. ==Episodes== ==Characters== ===PAW Patrol members=== thumb|right|385px|The illustrated designs of Ryder, Chase, Marshall, Rubble, Skye, Rocky, Zuma, Everest, Tracker, Cap'n Turbot and Robo-Dog, as of Tracker's introduction. ====Original members==== * Ryder (voiced by Owen Mason in Season 1 to the middle of Season 2, Elijha Hammill from the middle of Season 2 to late Season 3, Jaxon Mercey from late Season 3 to the middle of Season 6 and Ready Race Rescue, Joey Nijem from late Season 6 to the middle of Season 7, Beckett Hipkiss from late Season 7 to late Season 8, Kai Harris from late Season 8 onwards, Will Brisbin in PAW Patrol: The Movie and Finn Lee-Epp in The Mighty Movie in the US and John Campbell in Season 1 to early Season 2, Solomon Brown in early Season 2 to Season 6 and Lewis Crabb-LaHei in Season 7 onwards in the UK) is a tech-savvy and gifted boy who is the leader of the PAW Patrol. He is the caregiver of his best friend Chase. His standard vehicle is the red ATV that can convert into a PWC and snowmobile. * Chase (voiced by Tristan Samuel in Season 1, Max Calinescu in Season 2 to Season 4 and Mighty Pups, Justin Kelly in Season 5 to early Season 10, Luke Dietz in early Season 10 onwards, Iain Armitage in PAW Patrol: The Movie and Christian Convery in The Mighty Movie in the US and Hayden Hunter in Season 1 to Season 4 and Nye James in Season 5 onwards in the UK) is a 7-year-old German Shepherd who serves as a police dog, spy dog, and the second-in-command of the PAW Patrol. He is Ryder's best friend. He has a good sense of smell and sight but also has a cat and feather allergy. His usual vehicle is the royal blue-colored police truck that can convert into a spy truck as of Season 2. * Marshall (voiced by Gage Munroe in Season 1, Drew Davis in Season 2 to Season 5, Lukas Engel in Season 6 and Jet to the Rescue, Kingsley Marshall in late Season 6 to Season 8 and PAW Patrol The Movie and Christian Corrao in late Season 8 onwards, Rubble & Crew and The Mighty Movie in the US and Noah Ashby in Season 1 to 4 and Alfie Elliott in Season 5 onwards in the UK) is a clumsy but competent 6-year-old Dalmatian who serves as a firefighter and paramedic dog. He arrives last and always causes a humorous mishap with the other pups in the Lookout's elevator or the PAW Patroller. His main vehicle is a red fire truck that can convert into an ambulance as of Season 2. * Skye (voiced by Kallan Holley in Season 1 to Season 5 and Ready Race Rescue, Lilly Bartlam in Season 6 onwards and PAW Patrol: The Movie and Mckenna Grace in The Mighty Movie in the US and Holly Thomas in the UK) is a 7-year-old cockapoo who serves as the team's air rescue pup. She tends to do backflips. She usually pilots a grey helicopter with pink highlights. * Rocky (voiced by Stuart Ralston in Season 1 to Season 2, Samuel Faraci in Season 3 to the middle of Season 7, Jackson Reid in late Season 7 onwards and Callum Shoniker in PAW Patrol: The Movie and The Mighty Movie in the US and Eric O'Carroll in Season 1 to Season 6 and Courage Clutterbuck in Season 7 onwards in the UK) is a 6-year-old mixed breed who serves as a recycling and handyman pup. He dislikes getting wet during water missions. His main vehicle is a lime green-colored recycling truck which is a cross between a garbage truck and a forklift that can convert into a tugboat as of Season 3. * Rubble (voiced by Devan Cohen in Season 1 to Season 5, Keegan Hedley in Season 6 to the middle of Season 8 and PAW Patrol: The Movie, Lucien Duncan- Reid in the middle of Season 8 onwards and Luxton Handspiker in Rubble & Crew and The Mighty Movie in the US and Luca Townsend in Season 1 to Season 2, Fin Harvey in Season 3 to Season 5 and Piers Gardner in Season 6 onwards in the UK) is a 5-year-old English Bulldog who serves as a construction pup. His main vehicle is the yellow bulldozer that usually has a drill and later has a crane attachment as of Season 2. * Zuma (voiced by Alex Thorne in Season 1 to the middle of Season 4, Carter Thorne in the middle of Season 4 to Season 5, Shayle Simons in Season 6 to Season 8 and PAW Patrol: The Movie, Jordan Mazeral in Season 9 onwards and Nylan Parthipan in The Mighty Movie in the US and Samuel Woodward in Season 1 to Season 7 and Ollie Evans in Season 8 onwards in the UK) is a 5-year-old chocolate Labrador Retriever who serves as an aquatic rescue pup. His primary vehicle is the orange-colored hovercraft which can run quite well on land as well as water, can launch a lifebuoy, and can convert into a submarine that is equipped with a large claw-arm by Season 2. ====Later members==== * Cap'n Horatio Turbot (voiced by Ron Pardo in the US and Andy Turvey in the UK) is the PAW Patrol's most frequent caller and an occasional member of the team in the Mer-pup-themed special episodes. He is a marine biologist who knows all kinds of animal facts and runs a lighthouse on Seal Island. His primary vehicle is a boat called the Flounder. Along with Everest, he was added to the opening theme in season three. * Robo-Dog is a robotic dog introduced in "Pups Save Ryder's Robot". He serves as the driver for the PAW Patrol's larger vehicles. Unlike the other dogs, Robo-Dog communicates only in robotic barks. * Everest (voiced by Berkley Silverman in the US and Lois Hardie in the UK) is an 8-year-old purple-hued Siberian Husky who serves as a snow rescue pup in emergencies relating to snow, ice or mountains. She was introduced in the episode "The New Pup" where she helps them on a mission and originally lived at the South Pole. Along with Cap'n Turbot, she was added to the opening theme in season three. Her main vehicle is a silver snowcat with bright teal and orange highlights, which is equipped with a trail clearing claw. * Tracker (voiced by David Lopez in Season 3 to Season 7 and Jet to the Rescue and Mateo Carnovale in Season 8 onwards in the US and Fraser Martin in the UK) is a 4-year-old brown-and-white potcake dog who serves as a jungle rescue pup. He is the youngest pup on the PAW Patrol and was introduced in the Season 3 episode "Tracker Joins the Pups". He was originally shown to be afraid of the dark. His main vehicle is a white and olive jeep in zebra print, and he is bilingual, speaking both Spanish and English. * Tuck (voiced by Eamon Hanson in Season 6 to Season 7 and Roman Pesino in Season 9 onwards) and Ella (voiced by Isabella Leo) are two Golden Retriever siblings who are known as the Mighty Twins. A meteor gave them superpowers, where Tuck can shrink and Ella can grow at will. They were introduced in the Season 6 episode, "Mighty Pups, Super Paws: Pups Meet the Mighty Twins" where they help the Mighty Pups fight their archenemy the Ladybird. Their vehicle is a sky blue "Mighty Car" that splits into two "Mighty Motorcycles". * Rex (voiced by Luxton Handspiker in Season 7 and Hartley Bernier in Season 9 onwards) is a paraplegic Bernese Mountain Dog who uses a high-tech dog wheelchair to get around and serves him as an expert on dinosaurs and operates in the Dino Wilds where dinosaurs still live. He was introduced in the Season 7 episode "Dino Rescue: Pups and the Lost Dino Eggs" where he and Ryder introduce the PAW Patrol to the Dino Wilds and Cap'n Turbot's relatives who operated there. His vehicle is the azure and chartreuse Stegosaurus-plated jeep that has a ramp that allows him to enter and exit it. * The Cat Pack is a group of talking cats formed by Wild who sometimes help out the pups. The Cat Pack helps the PAW Patrol by thinking and acting like a cat. Each of its members has high-tech armor and vehicles that are modeled after a big cat. ** Wild (formerly called Wild Cat; voiced by Tristan Mammitzsch) is a ginger tabby cat as well as the first feline member of the PAW Patrol and the leader of the Cat Pack. He is graceful and smooth but has a fear of mice. He was introduced in the Season 7 episode "Moto Pups: Pups vs. the Ruff-Ruff Pack". By Season 9, Wild was revealed to have founded the Cat Pack where his armor grants him the speed of a cheetah. His vehicle is a motorcycle with retractable claws in its wheels and it gets replaced with a cheetah-themed version of it after Wild's original motorcycle was eaten by an enlarged Meow-Meow. ** Rory (voiced by Tianna SwamiNathan) is a British Shorthair and a member of the Cat Pack. She dislikes sitting still and loves to take cat naps and exercise. Her armor is modeled after a white tiger and she rides a white tiger-themed car where she possesses tiger-like pouncing abilities. ** Shade (voiced by Markeda McKay) is a tuxedo cat and a member of the Cat Pack. She has purple and black-spotted headphones where she listens to music, yarn balls, laser pointers, and climbing skills. Her uniform is modeled after a jaguar and rides a jaguar-themed car while possessing jaguar-like stealth. ** Leo (voiced by Kingston Crooks) is a tabby cat and a member of the Cat Pack. Like Wild, he is shown to have a fear of mice. His armor is modeled after a lion and rides a lion-themed jeep where he possesses lion-like strength. * Liberty (voiced by Marsai Martin in PAW Patrol: The Movie and The Mighty Movie and Tymika Tafari in Season 9 onwards) is a long-haired dachshund from Adventure City. She was introduced in PAW Patrol: The Movie where she helped the PAW Patrol at the time when Mayor Humdinger was the Mayor of Adventure City. Her main vehicle is a coral-pink scooter with blue and white highlights. * Al (voiced by Nylan Parthipan) is a Basset Hound truck driver with trucking experience and even speaks trucker. He was introduced in the Season 9 episode "Big Truck Pups: Pups Stop a Flood" where he helped the PAW Patrol and Mayor Goodway prevent a dam from bursting. His vehicle is a gray and red big truck with two grabber claws. * Coral (voiced by Kaia Ozdemir) is a cockapoo and a mer-pup from Puplantis, later revealed to be Skye's long-lost cousin. She was introduced in the Season 9 episode "Aqua Pups: Pups Save a Floating Castle" where she assisted her cousin and her team in saving what was for the longest time her home. Her vehicle is a teal, silver, and purple submarine in the shape of a seahorse which can also transform into a motorcycle for land travel. ===Supporting characters=== * Mayor Goodway (voiced by Deann Degruijter in Season 1 to early-Season 7 and Kim Roberts in late-Season 7 onwards in the US and Niki Felstead in the UK) is the mayor of Adventure Bay who lives at the City Hall and is one of the PAW Patrol's frequent callers. She can be very panicky at times and also works to outsmart Mayor Humdinger. ** Chickaletta is Mayor Goodway's pet chicken that she carries around in her purse. She generally ignores what is going on around her. Chickaletta is also shown to be a member of the Mini-Patrol. * Francois Turbot (voiced by Peter Cugno in the US and Andy Turvey in the UK) is Cap'n Turbot's cousin and research partner who lives with him in the Seal Island lighthouse. He works as a zoologist, artist, and nature photographer. He has a thick French accent and often uses French phrases in place of English words. * Katie (voiced by Katherine Forrester in the US and Abriella Bierer in the UK) is a young girl who works at the Adventure Bay pet parlor. She is loving and caring. ** Cali is Katie's pet cat whom she is usually seen with. She is also a member of the Mini-Patrol. * Mr. Porter (voiced by Blair Williams in the US and Andy Turvey in the UK) is the proprietor of Porter's Café in Adventure Bay as well as the grandfather of Alex. * Alex Porter (voiced by Christian Distefano in Season 1 to Mid-Season 5, Wyatt White in Mid-Season 5 to mid- Season 9 and Simon Webster in mid-Season 9 onwards) is a young boy who lives in Adventure Bay and is Mr. Porter's grandson. He is rather impatient. He is the leader of the Mini-Patrol, a PAW Patrol-inspired group consisting of himself and some pet animals which is seldom successful. * Jake (voiced by Scott McCord in the US and Alexander Armstrong in the UK) is a snowboarder from Adventure Bay who operates the ski resort on his mountain and is the caregiver of Everest. * Farmer Yumi (voiced by Hiromi Okuyama in Season 1 and Stephany Seki in Season 2 onwards in the US and Niki Felstead in the UK) is a farmer in Adventure Bay. She cares greatly for her animals. ** Farmer Al (voiced by Ron Pardo) is a farmer and proprietor of Moo Juice Dairy Farm in Adventure Bay and the husband of Farmer Yumi as of "Pups Save a Wedding". * Carlos (voiced by Lucius Hoyos in Season 2, Jaiden Cannatelli in Mid-Season 3 to Mid-Season 7, Diego Rieger in late Season 7 to Season 8 and Lucas Miranda in Season 9 onwards) is Ryder's pen pal from the jungle. He is an archaeologist and the caregiver of Tracker. * Danny (who prefers to be referred to as "Daring Danny X"; voiced by Daniel DeSanto in Season 3 to early Season 5 and Jonathan Malen in late Season 5 onwards) is a 10-year-old boy who made his debut in "Pups Save Daring Danny X". He was motivated to become a daredevil by a stunt Ryder performed during a rescue. A running gag is that when someone refers to him as "Danny" or "Daring Danny", he would quote "That's Daring Danny X". * The Princess of Barkingburg (voiced by Caoimhe Judd in the US and UK) is a young girl who is the ruler of Barkingburg. The PAW Patrol often helps her out when it comes to different threats to Barkingburg. ** The Earl of Barkingburg (voiced by Adrian Truss in the US and UK) is an unnamed elderly man who works as the Earl of Barkingburg. He is often seen with the Princess of Barkingburg and often acts as an advisor to her. * Dr. Tammy Turbot (voiced by Marisa McIntyre) is the sister of Cap'n Turbot and the cousin of Francois Turbot. She operates in the Dino Wilds where she works as a dinosaur doctor and also serves as the caregiver of Rex. ** Taylor Turbot (voiced by Ava Ro) is the daughter of Dr. Tammy Turbot and the niece of Cap'n Turbot and Francois. ===Villains=== * Mayor Humdinger (voiced by Ron Pardo in the US and Mike Cross in the UK) is the mayor of a neighboring town called Foggy Bottom who is the main antagonist of the series. He is the PAW Patrol and Mayor Goodway's biggest rival where he is always coming up with new plans to upstage Adventure Bay and make Foggy Bottom better which always get thwarted by the PAW Patrol. For some of his schemes, Humdinger would take up an alias that would eventually get his identity exposed. A running gag is that he would get annoyed if something happens to his top hat. On occasion, he would enlist the PAW Patrol's help should the Kitten Catastrophe Crew get into any danger. In PAW Patrol: The Movie, Humdinger briefly became the Mayor of Adventure City due to his name being the only one on the ballot and the leading candidate suddenly dropping out until his latest plan was thwarted by the PAW Patrol which led to his arrest and removal from his position of Mayor of Adventure City. ** The Kitten Catastrophe Crew are Mayor Humdinger's helpers and the villainous feline counterparts of the PAW Patrol. They will usually do what they are asked, but sometimes they can be stubborn and disobey Mayor Humdinger. ** Meow Meow is a robotic cat that serves as Mayor Humdinger's answer for Robo-Dog. When the Transformo-Zapper was used on Meow Meow during the "Cat Pack" episodes, Meow Meow grows to the size of a tiger, speaks English, and eats metal in order to keep its energy meter high. ** Harold Humdinger (voiced by Chance Hartsfield) is the nephew of Mayor Humdinger who possesses technopathy when empowered by a meteor fragment making him the antagonist of the "Mighty Pups, Super Paws" episodes. ** "The Cheetah" (voiced by Addison Holley) is Mayor Humdinger's cousin and Harold Humdinger's cousin once removed who first showed up in "Ready Race Rescue". She is a race car driver who will do anything to win a race. * Sweetie (voiced by Anya Cooke in the US and UK) is a West Highland White Terrier who is the pet dog of the Princess of Barkingburg who often conspires to become the next Queen of Barkingburg. On occasion, she would help the PAW Patrol if they end up having a common enemy. ** Busby is a robotic toy frog who serves as Sweetie's chew toy and minion. * Sid Swashbuckle (voiced by Charles Vandervaart) is a pirate who is the captain of the Swashbuckle Sloop. He has a tendency to repeat the word "need" two times. ** Arrby (voiced by Meesha Contreras in the US and Julie-Ann Dean in the UK) is a dachshund pirate dog who is the first mate of Sid Swashbuckle. He tends to refer to his boss as "Cap'n Boss Mr. Swashbuckle Sir". * The Ruff-Ruff Pack are a group of dogs that make up their own biker gang and have a rivalry with Wild. ** Hubcap (voiced by Julain Crispo in Season 7 and Kyle Hodgson in Season 9 onwards) is a French Bulldog and the leader of the Ruff-Ruff Pack. ** Gasket (voiced by Madison Abbott) is an Alaskan Malamute and member of the Ruff-Ruff Pack. She would be the one to invent things that would help the Ruff-Ruff Pack. A running gag is that she would come up with an idea that Hubcap would take credit for. ** Dwayne (voiced by Osias Reid Kyle in Season 7 and Levi Dombokah in Season 9 onwards) is a Great Dane and member of the Ruff-Ruff Pack who is not very bright. He operates the motorcycle that has a sidecar which Hubcap rides in. ==Production== According to Spin Master, the concept for PAW Patrol stemmed from a prototype for a transforming truck toy that Spin Master co-founder Ronnen Harary designed in 2010. Later the same year, the company requested some proposals for a television show based on the transforming toy, and accepted one from Bob the Builder creator Keith Chapman. Chapman sketched early designs of the PAW Patrol team under the working title Raffi & the Rescue Dogs. Spin Master hired toy designers to develop the format further; after the concept was in place, they started designing merchandise. Chapman's original pitch focused on the idea that the six PAW Patrol dogs were rescued by Ryder before joining the team. Scott Kraft, the show's first writer, and Jamie Whitney, the show's first director, decided to abandon the rescued dog theme in 2012. The name of the series' protagonist, Ryder, was changed multiple times during production; he was originally called Raffi, Roddy, and Robbie before Spin Master settled on Ryder. thumb|Early models of the PAW Patrol pups. According to a 2017 Spin Master interview, "everything pup- related was debated endlessly: names, sizes, ages, breeds." The pups' designs underwent major changes after Chapman's pitch; they were very realistic at first, with unique fur and textures based on their breeds, but they were later simplified and made more cartoonish. Cap'n Turbot's unique design, with his distinctive bead eyes and large nose, was based on the design of Chapman's Bob the Builder character. Ryder's hairstyle was based on Ronnen Harary's hair. In January 2012, Spin Master began approaching television broadcasters. The company negotiated a broadcast partnership with Nickelodeon, and the network first announced that it had picked up PAW Patrol at the 2013 Licensing Expo in Las Vegas, Nevada. The series became Spin Master's first solely-owned intellectual property (IP) once it was released in August 2013. Since it began production, the show's animation has been provided by Guru Studio. In a 2016 interview with Maclean's Magazine, Guru president Frank Falcone stated that his studio's animators were originally suspicious of the show's "toyetic" concept. The series' rock-inspired original score was composed by the Ontario- based group Voodoo Highway Music & Post. The opening theme song and the ending song used in each episode include vocals performed by Scott Simons. With each season of the show, new supporting characters and themes are introduced in its episodes. In a May 2016 interview for the Toronto Star, Spin Master president Ben Gadbois stated that his company would continue to introduce additional characters and concepts to increase the franchise's longevity and to expand upon the success of tie-in merchandise. In August of the same year, Ronnen Harary explained that these changes were intended to keep the show's content "fresh" and "relevant". ==Release== The series has been sold to TV networks in over 160 countries. In the United States, the series is aired on Nickelodeon as well as the Nick Jr. Channel. Select episodes are available to stream on the Noggin app and Paramount+. In Canada, the series is primarily shown on TVOKids, Knowledge Kids, Télé-Québec, City Saskatchewan, Treehouse, and CBC Kids. As required for Canadian-American programs aired on federally-funded networks, PAW Patrol has been dubbed in French for Quebec broadcasts and for its broadcast in France on TF1. Canal Panda airs a European Portuguese dub, and it aired on MBC3 in the Middle East. In the United Kingdom, a British English dub was released in November 2013, using the same scripts as the Canadian-American version with minor changes and shown on Channel 5 within it's Milkshake! block. and Nick Jr. UK. Also, a Welsh-language dub of the show titled Patrôl Pawennau is shown on S4C as part of its Cyw block. Anione, JEI TV, and KBS have all broadcast the Korean-dubbed version. The show has been aired in the Icelandic language on Iceland's public broadcaster RÚV since 2015. The first two seasons were shown in Finnish on Yle TV2. The video on demand platform Le.com obtained broadcast rights for a Mandarin Chinese-dubbed version of PAW Patrol in April 2016. It aired on MiniMini+ in Poland, e-Junior in the United Arab Emirates, and Clan TVE in Spain. On April 6, 2019, TV Tokyo premiered a Japanese dub of the show, starring Megumi Han as Ryder, who is renamed "Kento" (ケント). and In India, a Hindi dub of the series airs on Nick Jr. India. ==Reception== ===Critical reception=== PAW Patrol has received largely positive reviews from critics. Common Sense Media reviewer Emily Ashby gave the show a four-star rating, stating that "perhaps the show's best attribute is how it demonstrates the value of thoughtful problem-solving". Randy Miller of DVD Talk recommended the show, calling it "packed with all the harmless action and cornball jokes that kids can't help but snicker at". Stuff.co.nz reviewer Pattie Pegler also wrote favourably of the series, but felt that some of the characters "seem rather arbitrary, like Rocky the Recycling Pup". The About Group's Carey Bryson gave the series a mixed review, criticizing its "formulaic" nature but affirming that the "show is not without funny moments". A research study, commissioned by Sky in March 2016, reported that 16 percent of surveyed British and Irish children named PAW Patrol as their favorite program. Criticism had been directed toward the show's unequal gender representation because initially the team of dogs was primarily male and included only one female character. Brandy King of the Center on Media and Child Health "found the gender imbalance immediately noticeable" while watching the program. Today's Parent noted in April 2015 that PAW Patrol images appeared frequently on Twitter with the hashtag "#IncludeTheGirls". In response to these criticisms, the writers added an additional female character named Everest, a Siberian Husky and snow rescue dog, starting in season 2. The show's mobile app game, PAW Patrol: Air and Sea Adventure, was accused of behaving manipulatively towards younger viewers in a 2018 study by the University of Michigan which focused on app-based advertising techniques. Within the game, characters recognizable from the show would express disappointment if players did not purchase items with money. In a 2020 paper published in the journal Crime, Media, Culture, PAW Patrol is criticized for sending the message that companies are more capable of providing social services than the state. Author Liam Kennedy argues that the show "encourages complicity in a global capitalist system that (re)produces inequalities and causes environmental harms." Kennedy suggests that PAW Patrol echoes the "core tenets of neoliberalism" by depicting the state and politicians as either unethical or incompetent while the PAW Patrol corporation is entrusted with crimefighting and conservation. ===Ratings=== PAW Patrol has received consistently high ratings on Nickelodeon. Viacom CEO Philippe Dauman cited the series as a source of Nickelodeon's 2014 ratings growth. It ranked as the highest-rated, preschool TV program in the United States in November 2013 and held that position throughout the spring 2014 season. The spot was briefly overtaken by Team Umizoomi reruns in July 2016, but PAW Patrol reclaimed the title later the same month. Bloomberg L.P. described PAW Patrol as part of a "creative resurgence" that increased the Nick Jr. channel's viewership in 2016. At Nickelodeon's 2016 upfront presentation for future advertisers, Cyma Zarghami named PAW Patrol one of two preschool shows to have significantly helped boost ratings for the network (the other being Blaze and the Monster Machines). In March 2015, two back-to-back premieres of the show ranked among the top twenty weekday showings (among total viewers) in Australia. In May 2015, it was reported that PAW Patrol broadcasts on TF1 had been viewed by 45 per cent of households in France with preschool-aged children. ===Cultural impact=== The show has received recognition from public figures and celebrities. Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and his children are fans of the show; Trudeau mentioned the characters by name in a 2017 speech. After performing at the Super Bowl LII halftime show, Justin Timberlake filmed a segment for The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon in which he named Chase as his favourite PAW Patrol character and held a Chase plush toy. During his opening monologue for the 90th Academy Awards, host Jimmy Kimmel joked that Timothée Chalamet was missing PAW Patrol to attend the ceremony, but "Ryder and his team of pups saved the day, so". The show was satirized by The Onion in a 2018 parody article; referencing police brutality in the United States, the article claimed that the show's writers defended police dog, Chase, for shooting an unarmed black lab. In the wake of the George Floyd protests, the show was criticized for presenting a "good-cop archetype" after a post appeared on the show's Twitter account announcing that they would go dark in memory of Floyd received negative backlash. In July 2020, White House Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany claimed the show was canceled due to "cancel culture" but the show denied any such termination. ===Awards and nominations=== In 2014, the series' theme song was nominated for Outstanding Original Song – Main Title and Promo in the 41st Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Awards. In 2016, the season two episode "Pups Save a Mer-Pup" was nominated for Best Animated Television/Broadcast Production for Preschool Children in the 43rd Annie Awards. As of 2023, PAW Patrol has received twenty five Canadian Screen Award nominations with twenty wins. Year Award Category Nominee Result Ref. 2014 41st Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Awards Outstanding Original Song – Main Title and Promo Parents' Choice Foundation "Fun Stuff" Award Spin Master Environmental Media Awards Environmental Media Award in Children's Television 2015 Toy of the Year Awards Property of the Year, 2015 Preschool Toy of the Year, 2015 2016 Toy of the Year Awards Property of the Year, 2016 43rd Annie Awards Best Animated Television/Broadcast Production for Preschool Children "Pups Save a MerPup" 4th Canadian Screen Awards Best Pre-School Program or Series Spin Master Best Direction in an Animated Program or Series Jamie Whitney Licensing.biz People Awards Licensee Team of the Year Spin Master Australian Toy Association Preschool License of the Year Canadian Cinema Editors Awards Best Editing in Animation Tom Berger SOCAN Awards International TV Series Music Award Voodoo Highway Music & Post 2017 5th Canadian Screen Awards Best Pre-School Program or Series Spin Master Best Direction in an Animated Program or Series Jamie Whitney 2018 6th Canadian Screen Awards Best Pre-School Program or Series Spin Master Best Direction in an Animated Program or Series Charles E. Bastien Best Sound in an Animated Program or Series Richard Spence-Thomas, Tim Muirhead, Kyle Peters, Patton Rodrigues and Ryan Ongaro 2019 7th Canadian Screen Awards Animated Program or Series Spin Master Sound in an Animated Program or Series Richard Spence- Thomas, Tim Muirhead, Patton Rodrigues, Ryan Ongaro and Kyle Peters Music, Animation James Chapple, Graeme Cornies, David Kelly and Brian Pickett 46th Daytime Emmy Awards Outstanding Special Class Animated Program Mighty Pups Outstanding Sound Mixing For A Preschool Animated Program 2020 8th Canadian Screen Awards Pre-School Program or Series Spin Master Sound, Animation Richard Spence-Thomas, Kyle Peters, Patton Rodrigues, Ryan Ongaro, Tim Muirhead, Mitch Connors and Luke Dante Original Music, Animation Brian Pickett, Graeme Cornies, James Chapple and David Kelly Direction, Animation Charles E. Bastien 2021 9th Canadian Screen Awards Pre-School Program or Series Spin Master Sound in an Animated Program or Series Richard Spence- Thomas, Kyle Peters, Patton Rodrigues, Ryan Ongaro, Timothy Muirhead, Mitch Connors and Luke Dante Directing, Animated Program or Series Charles E. Bastien Performance in an Animated Program or Series Lilly Bartlam 2022 10th Canadian Screen Awards Pre-School Program or Series Spin Master Sound in an Animated Program or Series Richard Spence-Thomas, Timothy Muirhead, Mitch Connors, Luke Dante, Kyle Peters, Ryan Ongaro and Patton Rodrigue Directing, Animated Program or Series Charles E. Bastien Writing, Animated Program or Series Andy Guerdat and Steve Sullivan 2023 11th Canadian Screen Awards Pre- School Program or Series Spin Master Etan Vlessing, "Canadian Screen Awards: TV Drama ‘The Porter’ Leads With 19 Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter, February 22, 2023. Sound in an animated program or series Tim Muirhead, Mitch Connors, Luke Dante, Kyle Peters, Ryan Ongaro and Patton Rodrigues Directing, Animation Charles E. Bastien ==Films== In November 2017, Ronnen Harary confirmed that Spin Master was "currently considering whether to extend the PAW Patrol franchise into feature films at some point in the next 12 to 24 months." Animation tests were conducted in 2017 to measure how the characters "would translate onto the big screen" and the company developed a film script. On May 9, 2019, it was confirmed during Spin Master's First Quarter 2019 Earnings Conference Call that an animated theatrical film based on the series, titled PAW Patrol: The Movie was in the works with an August 2021 release date. On November 8, 2019, it was announced that Mikros Image in Montreal would handle the animation. Development of the film was confirmed on February 21, 2020, with Cal Brunker attached as director. Spin Master Entertainment produced the movie with an association in both Nickelodeon Movies and Paramount Pictures. On April 24, 2020, the release date was announced to be August 20, 2021. A first look at the film was shown on Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards 2021 on March 13, 2021. It was announced on November 3, 2021, that a sequel, titled PAW Patrol: The Mighty Movie, will be released on September 29, 2023. ===Box office performance=== Film Release date Domestic opening weekend Box office gross Domestic Other territories Worldwide PAW Patrol December 22, 2016 $303,032 $303,032 Mission Big Screen July 7, 2017 $54,731 $54,731 Sea Patrol February 1, 2018 $389,945 $389,945 Mighty Pups October 4, 2018 $8,373,241 $8,373,241 Ready, Race, Rescue! October 3, 2019 $15,193,000 $15,193,000 Jet to the Rescue September 10, 2020 $1,695,576 $1,695,576 Charged Up July 17, 2020 $43,367 $43,367 PAW Patrol: The Movie August 20, 2021 $13,148,340 $40,127,371 $104,200,000 $144,327,371 Total $ $ $ $ List indicator(s) * A dark-grey cell indicates the information is not available for the film. ==Other media== ===Video games=== In February 2018, a video game based on the series, titled PAW Patrol: On a Roll was announced. Developed by Torus Games and published by Outright Games, it was released for PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, and Microsoft Windows on October 23, 2018. Another video game, titled PAW Patrol Mighty Pups: Save Adventure Bay, was announced on July 17, 2020. Developed by Drakhar Studio and also published by Outright Games, it was released for PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, Stadia, and Microsoft Windows on November 6, 2020. Another video game for the film, titled PAW Patrol The Movie: Adventure City Calls was announced on June 10, 2021. Developed by Drakhar Studio and also published by Outright Games, it was released for PlayStation 4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, Stadia, and Microsoft Windows on August 13, 2021. It was announced in May 2022 that Outright Games is releasing a racing game for the series titled PAW Patrol: Grand Prix. Developed by 3D Clouds and was released for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X|S, Nintendo Switch, Google Stadia, and Microsoft Windows on September 30, 2022. A DLC for Grand Prix titled Race in Barkingburg was released on December 2, 2022. A new DLC added a battle arena mode title Pup Treat Arena was released on March 10, 2023. In June 2023, it was announced that a new game titled PAW Patrol World set to be released on September 29, 2023. It is being developed by 3D Clouds and is released for PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X|S, Nintendo Switch, and Microsoft Windows. ===Live events=== In April 2016, a stage show titled PAW Patrol Live: Race to the Rescue was announced. The show features the PAW Patrol characters competing in a race. It toured Canada, the United States, Mexico, New Zealand, Australia and the Philippines. A sequel show, titled PAW Patrol Live: The Great Pirate Adventure, was announced in June 2017. It follows the PAW Patrol as they rescue Cap'n Turbot from a cavern, and it will tour the same countries as its predecessor. The shows are produced by VStar Entertainment Group, which is best known for producing the popular Sesame Street Live touring shows for 37 years. Mascots based on the PAW Patrol characters have appeared at events across Canada, the United States, and the United Kingdom. They joined an "Etch A Sketch Day" celebration at Spin Master's office in Toronto on July 26, 2016. The characters, along with replicas of the Lookout tower from the program, were included as part of the Nick Jr. Play Date Tour in autumn 2015. Marshall and Chase made appearances at shopping malls throughout Nottingham, Suffolk, and Somerset in the U.K. in the summer of 2016. Multiple meet-and-greet events attracted far more attendees than expected, with some reaching over 5,000 visitors. They appeared for the first time in Northern Ireland at Glenarm Castle on July 13, 2016. They are scheduled to appear regularly in a Nickelodeon-themed area of the Thurrock's Lakeside Shopping Centre located on the outskirts of London, England. Like many children's properties, unauthorized productions and events using copyright infringing costumes featuring the show's characters have attracted the attention of Spin Master and Nickelodeon. In February 2016, several Greene King pubs in the U.K. scheduled breakfast events with costumed characters modelled after the pups. Nickelodeon forced the chain to stop every event by threatening a lawsuit if they went ahead. There was some consumer backlash as a result, but the events were not held. ===Rubble spin-off series=== On November 3, 2021, Nickelodeon and Spin Master stated that an untitled spin-off series focusing on one of the main six pups was in development, and was set to premiere in 2023. On March 24, 2022, it was announced that the spin-off series would focus on Rubble. In November 2022, the series' title was revealed to be Rubble & Crew. Rather than Guru Studio, the spinoff is animated by Jam Filled Entertainment, and premiered on February 3, 2023. ==Merchandise== right|thumb|400px|alt=Photograph of a PAW Patrol figure set|A set of PAW Patrol figures On May 18, 2014, Spin Master introduced a toy line based on the television series at Toys "R" Us locations across Canada. The line was not distributed to international markets until June 22 of the same year. Dion Vlachos was in charge of the U.S. product launch. PAW Patrol has since become one of Spin Master's most profitable brands. Analysts for the National Bank of Canada reported that toys and games based on the show accounted for approximately $245 million U.S. (or 25 per cent) of Spin Master's gross product sales for 2015. Spin Master chairman Anton Rabie noted in August 2016 that the "continuing strength" of PAW Patrol toys, in addition to new acquisitions and movie licenses, made up 40.5 per cent of the firm's second- quarter revenue. Marketing manager Emma Eden said that the toys were responsible for increasing the company's presence in the preschool market. Throughout 2016, Spin Master's revenue grew more in this market than in any other toy category. PAW Patrol has been cited as the sole reason for this. The NPD Group named PAW Patrol the top new toy brand of 2015 in the United Kingdom. The group also reported that it was the best-selling preschool license in France in the first quarter of 2015. Dave Brandon, the chief executive officer of Toys "R" Us, listed the PAW Patroller vehicle toy as one of the 2015 holiday season's "hottest" items. Argos the U.K. catalogue retailer included the PAW Patrol Air Patroller vehicle on its list of the toys it predicts will be bestsellers during the Christmas 2016 season. In 2018, it was estimated that total retail sales to date were approximately . ==References== ==External links== * * PAW Patrol at NickJr.com * PAW Patrol at TVOKids.com * Category:2010s Canadian animated television series Category:2020s Canadian animated television series Category:2010s Canadian children's television series Category:2020s Canadian children's television series Category:2010s preschool education television series Category:2020s preschool education television series Category:2013 Canadian television series debuts Category:Animated preschool education television series Category:Animated television series about dogs Category:Animated television series about children Category:Canadian children's animated action television series Category:Canadian children's animated adventure television series Category:Canadian children's animated comedy television series Category:Canadian children's animated fantasy television series Category:Canadian computer-animated television series Category:Canadian preschool education television series Category:English-language television shows Category:Nick Jr. original programming Category:TVO original programming Category:Toy brands Category:Television shows adapted into video games