P. C. Sharma is an Indian politician and member of Madhya Pradesh's 15th Vidhan Sabha, who was Cabinet Minister of Law and Legal Affairs Department, Public Relations Department, Science and Technology Department, Department of Civil Aviation, Department Associated with the Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh Government.of Madhya Pradesh Kamal Nath Ministry, Government of Madhya Pradesh. He represents Bhopal Dakshin-Paschim (Vidhan Sabha constituency) in Madhya Pradesh. == Early life and education == P. C. Sharma, son of Late Shri Mangilal Sharma was born at Harsud in Madhya Pradesh. Having completed his B.E. Shri Sharma entered into business and agriculture. His interests include sports, excursions, music, watching movies and public service. Sharma has traveled to Switzerland, Malaysia, Singapore, Hong Kong, Bangkok, America, England, France, Germany and Japan. He was elected MLA for the first time in 1998 from the Bhopal South Assembly constituency and became the chairman of the Special Rights Committee. == Political career == P. C. Sharma started public and political life as a corporator in the Bhopal Municipal Corporation. Besides being a corporator, he has been a member and president of several committees of the Corporation. Shri Sharma has been the Director of Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board, Madhya Pradesh corporator, Co-ordinator of Environment Forum, Patron of the Madhya Pradesh Slum Landless Labourers Federation and Chairman of the Bhopal Development Authority. He has also discharged the responsibilities as executive member of Madhya Pradesh Congress Committee, Vice President of District Congress Committee, District President of Congress Seva Dal and Vice President of Pradesh Seva Dal. He is currently District president of Bhopal INC, Sharma was elected MLA from Bhopal South- West for the 15th Legislative Assembly in the year 2018. P.C. Sharma took oath of the minister's post in Chief Minister Shri Kamal Nath's Council of Ministers on December 25, 2018. == References == == External links == * * Category:Living people Category:Indian National Congress politicians Category:1948 births Category:Madhya Pradesh MLAs 1998–2003 Category:Madhya Pradesh MLAs 2018–2023 Category:Indian National Congress politicians from Madhya Pradesh