PCO Imaging (PCO AG) is a developer and manufacturer of camera systems for scientific and industrial applications. == History == The company was founded in 1987 by Emil Ott, who worked as a researcher at the Technical University of Munich. During the conducting of scientific measurements with intensified slow scan cameras, he was convinced of the fact that the existing camera standard did not meet the requirements of scientific applications. Therefore, he founded PCO (Pioneers in Cameras and Optoelectronics) to improve the technology of the existing camera systems.Aus Dr. Otts Idee wurde Erfolgsfirma, Elfi Bachmeier-Fausten, German, Mittelbayerische Zeitung, accessed on June 5, 2018 The developed technologies of PCO are since then used for DNA sequencing, machine vision, solar cell quality control, measuring velocity and surveillance alongside to microscopy and further applications.Modulated CMOS camera for fluorescence lifetime microscopy, Vladimir V. Leschevich, Oleg. G. Penayzkov, Heat and Mass Transfer Institute, Taipei, Taiwan, August 2, 2013, accessed on May 27, 2018.sCMOS Cameras Take the Scientific Imaging Stage, Chen, Hongtao; Holst, Gerhard; Gratton, Enrico , Novus Light Technologies Today, May 7, 2018, accessed on May 27, 2018. == Products == thumb|STS-135 last Space Shuttle liftoff in slow motion The company designs, manufactures and distributes scientific imaging devices equipped with scientific complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (sCMOS), complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) and charge-coupled device (CCD) sensor technology.Schneller als der Massenmarkt, Marion Koller, German, Mittelbayerische Zeitung, May 18, 2018, accessed on June 5, 2018. In 2016, the company introduced the first luminescence lifetime imaging camera based on a high frequency modulated CMOS image sensor which is called pco.flim. The pco.flim CMOS camera can be used for a vast variety of biomedical applications that require a large frame and high-speed acquisition.Modulated CMOS camera for fluorescence lifetime microscopy, Chen, Hongtao; Holst, Gerhard; Gratton, Enrico , Wiley Online Library, accessed on May 27, 2018.pco.panda 4.2 back illuminated (bi), a state-of-the-art sCMOS camera, Optic.org, February 22, 2018, accessed on May 27, 2018. The new technology for sCMOS (scientific CMOS) image sensors was launched in 2009 during the Laser World of Photonics fair in Munich as Joint Venture from PCO with the companies Andor Technology and Fairchild Camera and Instrument.[https://application.wiley- vch.de/berlin/journals/op/09-03/OP0903_S37-S39.pdf sCMOS – Die eierlegende Wollmilchsau der Bildsensorik?], German, Wiley-VCH, 2009 In general, CCD-based cameras offer high sensitivity but slow sampling speeds. Conventional CMOS cameras offer very fast frame rates but compromise dynamic range. sCMOS image sensors, on the other hand, offer extremely low noise, rapid frame rates, wide dynamic range, high quantum efficiency, high resolution, and a large field of view simultaneously in one image. This makes them particularly suitable for high fidelity, quantitative scientific measurement and low-light-level conditions.CMOS (sCMOS) Technology: An Overview, PhotonicsOnline, Ron Grunsby, June 18, 2012, accessed on September 18, 2018 thumb|pco.panda 4.2 - 16 bit sCMOS compact camera == References == == External links == * PCO AG Official Website Category:Electronics companies of Germany Category:German brands Category:Manufacturing companies established in 1987 Category:Manufacturing companies of Germany Category:Multinational companies headquartered in Germany